add notes about ACID transactions (#209)
ClickHouse/clickhouse-docs: docs/en/guides/developer/transactional.md

# Transactional (ACID) support

> INSERTs into one partition in one table of the MergeTree\* family up to `max_insert_block_size` rows are transactional (ACID):

Reviewer: Are you sure this formatting is enough to understand that next points are valid only if `up to `max_insert_block_size` rows` is true? 
Actually for ACI. D is valid in any case.

Author: Thanks @qoega , I updated, here is how it reads now.  Also moved the ACID lines from H2 to a dictionary:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25182304/178489460-73f0d18c-9ab2-40be-b2e5-99c6b6fc0dcc.png)

### Atomic

> INSERTs succeed or are rejected as a whole- if a confirmation is sent to the client, then all rows were inserted; if an error is sent to the client, then no rows were inserted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
INSERTs succeed or are rejected as a whole - if a confirmation is sent to the client, then all rows were inserted; if an error is sent to the client, then no rows were inserted.
```

### Consistent

If an INSERT succeeded, then all rows were inserted and they do not violate table constraints; if constraints were violated, then no rows were inserted.

### Isolated

Clients observe a consistent snapshot of the table - either the state of the table before an INSERT, or the state after a successful INSERT; no partial state is seen.

### Durable

A successful INSERT is written to the filesystem before sending a confirmation to the client, on single replica or multiple replica systems (this is controlled by the `insert_quorum` setting), and ClickHouse can ask the operating system to sync the filesystem data on the storage media (this is controlled by the `fsync_after_insert` setting).

> ### Details

Reviewer: I would not add it on the same level as ACID headers. Probably converting previous headers to a table or just a list will make it less tricky.

Author: see above screen-grab

- If a table has multiple partitions and the INSERT covers multiple partitions - then insertion into each partition is transactional on its own.

> - INSERTs into multiple tables with one statement is possible if materialized views are used.

Reviewer: Probably something like that is more correct? But I'm not a native speaker.
```suggestion
- Atomic INSERT into multiple tables with one statement is possible if materialized views are used.
```
@alexey-milovidov How do you think, do we need to cover here what happens if MV insert fails and how deduplication works for MV?

```suggestion
- INSERTs into multiple tables with one statement are possible if materialized views are used.
```

Reviewer 2: Let's merge, then improve...

- INSERTs into a distributed table is not transactional as a whole, while insertion into each shard is transactional.

- Inserts into Buffer tables are neither atomic, isolated, consistent, nor durable.

- Atomicity is ensured even if `async_insert` is enabled, but can be disabled with the `wait_for_async_insert` setting.

- The `max_insert_block_size` is 1,048,576 rows by default and can be adjusted as needed.

- ClickHouse uses multiversion concurrency control (MVCC) with snapshot isolation internally.

- All ACID properties are valid even in the case of server kill / crash.

> - Using either insert_quorum into different availability zones or `fsync` should be enabled to ensure durable inserts in the typical setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Using either `insert_quorum` into different availability zones or `fsync_after_insert=1` to ensure durable inserts in the typical setup.
```

> - "Consistency" in ACID terms does not cover the semantics of distributed systems, see https://jepsen.io/consistency which is controlled by different settings ([`select_sequential_consistency`](../../operations/settings/settings.md/#settings-select_sequential_consistency))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Consistency" in ACID terms does not cover the semantics of distributed systems, see [Jepsen](https://jepsen.io/consistency) which is controlled by different settings ([`select_sequential_consistency`](../../operations/settings/settings.md/#settings-select_sequential_consistency))
```

- This explanation does not cover a new transactions feature that allows full-featured transactions for multiple SELECTS over multiple tables and materialized views, etc.

- If a client does not receive response from the server, the client does not know if the transaction succeeded and it can repeat the transaction, using exactly-once insertion properties.

> :::note
> With `async_insert` deduplication will not work, so using retry will result in at least once transaction.
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- With `async_insert` deduplication will not work per INSERT, so retries on failures will result in at least once semantics of INSERTs.
```
